---
id: generate-crud-pages
title: 3. Generate CRUD pages automatically with Inferencer
tutorial:
    prev: tutorial/getting-started/{preferredUI}/create-project
    next: tutorial/getting-started/store-your-repository
---

## Inferencer

## Inferencer

Inferencer is a powerful tool in the **refine** ecosystem that helps developers quickly generate CRUD (create, read, update, delete) pages for their data model. It analyzes your data model based on the resource scheme and automatically creates the necessary forms and tables for CRUD operations.

#### Why use Inferencer?

There are several benefits:

1- The goal of Inferencer is to reduce the amount of time spent on creating views for resources by generating the code automatically. This can save developers a significant amount of time and effort, especially on large projects with many resources.

2- Inferencer generates code that is easy to customize. Instead of starting from scratch, you can use the auto-generated code as a starting point and make changes to fit your specific needs. This allows you to quickly iterate and get your project up and running faster.

3- By using Inferencer, you can avoid common mistakes that can arise when building CRUD pages manually. This can help you avoid bugs and other issues that can arise during development.

Overall, using Inferencer can greatly speed up development time and reduce the amount of code that needs to be written manually. It helps ensure that your CRUD pages are consistent and adhere to best practices, freeing you up to focus on more complex tasks.

#### Learn Inferencer

-   Learn about [how Inferencer works](/docs/packages/documentation/inferencer).
-   Learn about [how to use Inferencer with Mantine](/docs/api-reference/mantine/components/inferencer/).

## Preview the generated pages

So far we have added complete CRUD pages by utilizing Inferencer feature to the project. Let's take a look at the auto-generated CRUD pages that Inferencer handles for us.

Before we start, let's understand the API that we will be using in this tutorial. We will be using the [JSONPlaceholder](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/) API, which is a created by **refine** team to provide a fake REST API for testing. You can check out the **refine** fake REST API: https://api.fake-rest.refine.dev

:::info

In [Unit 3](/docs/tutorial/understanding-dataprovider/index), it will be explained in detail how **refine** apps communicate with the API via the `dataProvider`.

:::

### List Page

To preview the list page, go back to your browser and open the `localhost:3000` address. You should see the list page for the `posts` resource that was generated by Inferencer like below:

::: note
When you navigate to the `localhost:3000`, **refine** will redirect you to the initial resource's list page registered to `<Refine />` component like `localhost:3000/posts`
:::

<!-- TODO: Add Headless Inferece List Page -->

### Create Page

To preview the create page, go back to your browser and open the `localhost:3000/posts/create` address or click the `Create` button on the list page. You should see the create page for the `posts` resource that was generated by Inferencer like below:

<!-- TODO: Add Headless Inferece Create Page -->

### Edit Page

To preview the create page, go back to your browser and open the `localhost:3000/posts/edit/123` address or click the `Edit` button on the record in the list page. You should see the edit page for the `posts` resource with the id `123` that was generated by Inferencer like below:

<!-- TODO: Add Headless Inferece Edit Page -->

### Show Page

To preview the create page, go back to your browser and open the `localhost:3000/posts/show/123` address or click the `Show` button on the record in the list page. You should see the show page for the `posts` resource with the id `123` that was generated by Inferencer like below:

<!-- TODO: Add Headless Inferece Show Page -->
