---
id: index
title: 1.1. Build Your First refine App
tutorial:
    prev: false
    next: tutorial/introduction/prerequisites
---

## About This Tutorial

This tutorial guides through the process of using [**refine.new**](https://refine.new) to quickly initialize, build and launch a fully-functional React admin panel 🚀.

It step by step covers what constitutes a basic **refine** **Blog** app and explores fundamental **refine** concepts, namely: the `dataProvider`, `authProvider` and `resources` props.

Most of the code is already generated by the magic of `refine.new`. So, the content mainly presents low level inspections of biolerplate code to show how **refine** works under the hood. Units related to `dataProvider` and `resources` explain how **refine** handles API calls and RESTful routing for implementing CRUD actions in a React admin panel. The later part of the series elaborates on the implementation of CRUD pages using [**Material UI**](https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/overview/) components. The last unit sees how user authentication is implemented in a **refine** app.

This tutorial covers the following topics:

-   Initializing a React admin panel app using **refine.new**
-   Understanding [`dataProvider`](/docs/api-reference/core/providers/data-provider/) and CRUD Actions in **refine**
-   Understanding the concept of the [`resources`](docs/api-reference/core/components/refine-config.md#resources) prop in **refine**
-   Adding CRUD pages to **refine** app
-   Understanding the [`authProvider`](/docs/api-reference/core/providers/auth-provider/) prop and **refine** Auth Pages

:::note
If you would rather start exploring **refine** with some examples before diving in, visit our [examples](/docs/examples/) page and choose an example to open and explore it in an online editor.
:::

:::note Thank you Astro Community! ❤️

While preparing the refine's tutorial, we were _quite_ inspired by the [Astro](https://astro.build/) tutorial. We thank Astro for your contributions to the open-source community 🎉

:::

<Checklist>
<ChecklistItem id="looks-great">
Great! I'm ready to begin!
</ChecklistItem>
</Checklist>
